doc: Improve documentation for bl_storage and NSIB (#8948)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: samples/bootloader/README.rst

.. note::

   Currently, the NSIB does not support performing firmware updates over the SMP transport.
   If the application using the NSIB requires SMP-based firmware updates, such as Bluetooth® LE DFU, :ref:`include MCUboot as a second-stage bootloader <ug_bootloader_adding_upgradable>`.

.. _bootloader_rot:

Requirements
************

The NSIB supports the following development kits:

.. table-from-sample-yaml::

Overview
********

The NSIB implements a simple and reliable *Root of Trust* (RoT) for a secure boot chain:

1. Locks the flash memory.

>    To enable the RoT, the flash memory containing itself and its configuration is locked using the hardware available on the given architecture.

Author: I don't want to use the word partition as I don't know if we have defined a partition that spans this address range.

>    To enable the RoT, the flash memory containing itself and its configuration is locked using the hardware available on the given architecture.

Reviewer: does it look better now?

>    To enable the RoT the flash memory that contains itself and its configuration is locked using the hardware that is available on the given architecture.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   To enable the RoT, the flash memory containing itself and its configuration is locked using the hardware available on the given architecture.

Reviewer 3: I second Sigvart's suggestion :)

   For additional details on locking, see the :ref:`fprotect_readme` driver.

#. Selects the next slot in the boot chain.

   The next stage in the boot chain may either be an application or another bootloader and there may be one or two slots allocated for this stage.

>    Each slot has a version number attached to it and the slot with the latest version will be selected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The next stage in the boot chain may either be an application or another bootloader, and one or two slots may be allocated for this stage. 
   Each slot has a version number, and the bootloader will select the slot with the latest version.

Reviewer 3: Both suggested sentences from Sigvart look ok to me 👍🏻

   Two slots are always used when the next stage is a second bootloader.
   For more information about creating a second stage bootloader, see :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_upgradable`.

#. Verifies the next stage in the boot chain.

   The next image has metadata containing the full public key that corresponds to the private key used to sign the firmware.
   This public key is checked against the provisioned hashes of public keys to determine if the image is valid.

   All public key hashes at lower indices than the matching hash are permanently invalidated at this point.
   You can use this mechanism to decommission broken keys.

#. Boots the next stage in the boot chain.

   All peripherals that have been used are reset and the next stage is booted.

> #. Shares the cryptographic library

Reviewer 3: Add period (.)

   The NSIB shares some of its functionality through an external API (``EXT_API``).

>    For more information on the process, see the :file:`bl_crypto.h` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For more information on the process, see :ref:`doc_bl_crypto`.
```

Provisioning
============

> The public key hashes are not compiled with the source code of the NSIB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The public key hashes are not compiled at build time with the source code of the NSIB.
```

Reviewer: ok, so I'll drop this suggestion

Instead, they must be written to the device in a process called *provisioning*.

The hashes are automatically generated by the build system based on the specified private key and the additional public keys.

By default, the hashes are placed directly into the NSIB HEX file and then automatically provisioned when the HEX file is programmed to the device.

> Alternatively, in a more realistic manufacturing process, the NSIB HEX file and the HEX file containing the hashes can be programmed separately.
> For this approach, use the Python scripts located in the :file:`scripts/bootloader` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in a more realistic manufacturing process, you can program the NSIB HEX file and the HEX file containing the hashes separately, using the Python scripts located in the :file:`scripts/bootloader` folder.
```

> In either case, the NSIB accesses the provisioned data at runtime using the :ref:`doc_bl_storage` library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In either case, the NSIB accesses the provisioned data at run time using the :ref:`doc_bl_storage` library.
```

Author: IMHO runtime is more established than "run time". https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Runtime_(program_lifecycle_phase)

Reviewer: There is a difference in the way we use runtime and run time, according to our style guide: https://projecttools.nordicsemi.no/confluence/display/TECHDOC/Terms%2C+abbreviations%2C+and+spelling+rules#Terms,abbreviations,andspellingrules-R

run time (n. ) Spelling: Two words. (source: Foldoc)

runtime (mod.) Example: The runtime library is required to build a complete application.

This to me looks more akin to the two-words spelling use case.

Do you think this distinction is incorrect?

Author: I was not aware this term was covered by the guide.

I don't think this distinction is correct.

They can be used interchangeably AFAIK, but I don't think the reader will be very confused by "run time", so this suggestion is fine.

Reviewer: Ok, so I guess we can continue this discussion offline (if the style guide needs an update)

.. _bootloader_provisioning_otp:

OTP regions
-----------

> For the nRF SoCs that support it, such as the nRF9160 or nRF5340, the provisioned data is held in the *one-time programmable* (OTP) region in the *User Information Configuration Registers* (UICR) instead of the internal flash memory.
> OTP regions are special regions of the flash memory that only allow flash memory writes in half-word lengths, and *only* when the target half-word is the value ``0xFFFF``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One-time programmable (OTP) regions are special regions of the *User Information Configuration Registers* (UICR) that only allow flash memory writes in half-word lengths, and *only* when the target half-word is the value ``0xFFFF``.

On the SoCs that support OTP regions, such as the nRF9160 and nRF5340, the provisioned data is held in the OTP regions instead of the internal flash memory.
```

Reviewer: @SebastianBoe Do OTP regions allow memory writes only when the target half-word is 0xFFFF or only when it is not?
Also, are there more then one OTP region in the supported SoCs?

Author: New phrasing is a bit ambiguous to how many OTP regions there are in the UICR, don't you agree?

Reviewer: Updated (that's why I asked)

> Because of these design constraints, the following limitations apply:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of the design constraints of OTP regions, the following limitations apply:
```

Author: -1 to regions

> * The public key hash may not contain half-words with the value ``0xFFFF``, as such hashes cannot be guaranteed to be immutable when placed in the OTP region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The public key hash can not contain half-words with the value ``0xFFFF``, as such hashes cannot be guaranteed to be immutable when placed in the OTP region.
```

Author: This is a limitation that we are asking the user to respect. Is may then not more appropriate than can ?

Reviewer: Ok then I'd go with must then. I mean, there is no scenario in which they can use a half-word with vaue 0xFFFF, right?

Reviewer: ^this

Author: correct

   B0 flash memory layout

.. note::
   When the *Provision* area is in the OTP region it will not appear in the flash memory layout.
   See :ref:`bootloader_provisioning_otp` for more information.

.. _bootloader_pre_signed_variants:

Pre-signed variants
-------------------

> When two slots are present two images must be built.
> One that is executable from slot 0 and the other from slot 1.
> Building the image for slot 1 is done by enabling the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BUILD_S1_VARIANT` option.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When two slots are present, two images must be built.
One that is executable from slot 0, and the other one from slot 1.
Building the image for slot 1 is done by enabling the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BUILD_S1_VARIANT` option.
```

   B0 flash memory layout with MCUboot

.. _bootloader_signature_keys:

> Signature Keys

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Signature keys
```

==============

The ECDSA-p256 key type is supported for validating the next image in the boot chain.

By default, when not explicitly defined, a private/public key pair is generated during the build.
However, these key pairs should only be used during development.
See :ref:`ug_fw_update_development_keys` for more details.

For details on creating and using custom signature keys, refer to the :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_immutable_keys` documentation.

.. _bootloader_monotonic_counter:

> 

Reviewer 3: Monotonic counter

By default, when not explicitly defined, a private/public key pair is generated during the build.
However, these key pairs should only be used during development.
See :ref:`ug_fw_update_development_keys` for more details.

For details on creating and using custom signature keys, refer to the :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_immutable_keys` documentation.

.. _bootloader_monotonic_counter:

Monotonic counter
=================

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_start

A non-volatile *monotonic counter* can be stored in the *Provision* area and is used to implement anti-rollback protection.

Counter updates are written to slots in the *Provision* area, with each new counter update occupying a new slot.
For this reason, the number of counter updates, and therefore firmware version updates, is limited.
Enable the counter with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_MONOTONIC_COUNTER` option.

The supported number of updates depends on the size of the *Provision* area and how much of that area is taken up by other features, like public key hashes.
See option :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_NUM_VER_COUNTER_SLOTS` for more details.

> To set the counter value for an image, build it using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` option set appropriately:

Reviewer 4: Why has the information on how to set `CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` for a child image (mcuboot) been removed? This was recently added in another PR.

Author: Configuring child images is already documented in https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/ug_multi_image.html#image-specific-variables.

Repeating this here increases maintenance, has a risk of getting outdated, and has a risk of being lower quality, and missing details, as the common documentation for configuring child images.

Reviewer 4: Wouldn't all projects using the immutable bootloader needs to set `CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` for the second stage bootloader if they actually want to update it? The point of the immutable bootloader is to be able to update the second stage bootloader, right? So why shouldn't the sample explain/show exactly how to do that?

For a real production application it would make sense to put the version number in version control. If not the developer have to guess what version of mcuboot is running on the devices in production, and that can be hard to figure out if you haven't thought of it already. That's why I think the child_image solution is the only sensible solution for this exact problem, and I think it would be nice to tell this to the customers instead of hiding it deep in a section on another page. Yes, it's a bit more maintenance cost for us, but hopefully saves the customer for a lot of frustration.

At a minimum, we should explain that `CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` needs to be set for the image of the second stage bootloader (usually mcuboot) and link to the multi image page.

Reviewer: @annwoj FYI

Author: "The point of the immutable bootloader is to be able to update the second stage bootloader, right?"
Not entirely right. Note that NSIB can boot any image that implements FW_INFO. So you could have NSIB->NCS_application. It's not just NSIB->MCUBoot->NCS_application that is supported.

"Wouldn't all projects using the immutable bootloader needs to set CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION for the second stage bootloader if they actually want to update it? "
No, it defaults to 1, so they can update MCUBoot after first deploying it with the default version number.

"At a minimum, we should explain that CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION needs to be set for the image of the second stage bootloader (usually mcuboot) and link to the multi image page."
Done.

Author: @sigvartmh : Please clarify if it is supported to boot non-MCUBoot images from NSIB.

Reviewer 2: AFAIK if you set `CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT` without enabling mcuboot you should get an application which is booted and signed by NSIB it could be that you'll have to also enable fw info

Author: Then I say it's supported.

Interopability between NCS components is implied unless excplicitly stated otherwise.

In this PR I am changing the wording several places to make it more clear that this is supported.

.. include:: /includes/build_and_run.txt

> NSIB should be included as a child image in a multi-image build, rather than being built stand-alone.
> While it is technically possible to build NSIB by itself and merge it into other application images, this process is not supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The NSIB should be included as a child image in a multi-image build, rather than being built stand-alone.
While it is technically possible to build the NSIB by itself and merge it into other application images, this process is not supported.
```

> The NSIB should be included as a child image in a multi-image build, rather than being built stand-alone.
> While it is technically possible to build the NSIB by itself and merge it into other application images, this process is not supported.
> To reduce the development time and potential issues with this route, let the existing |NCS| infrastructure for multi-image builds handle the integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. caution::
   The NSIB should be included as a child image in a multi-image build, rather than being built stand-alone.
   While it is technically possible to build the NSIB by itself and merge it into other application images, this process is not supported.
   To reduce the development time and potential issues with this route, let the existing |NCS| infrastructure for multi-image builds handle the integration.
```

> For building and running NSIB with an application, see :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_immutable`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For building and running the NSIB with an application, see :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_immutable`.
```

Building and running using |VSC|
================================

.. include:: /includes/build_and_run_bootloader.txt

> To add NSIB as a child image to your application, complete the following steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To add the NSIB as a child image to your application, complete the following steps:
```

   #. Click :guilabel:`Save`.

#. Select :guilabel:`Build` in the :guilabel:`Actions View` to start the build process.

>    The build process creates two images, one for NSIB and one for the application, and merges them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The build process creates two images, one for the NSIB and one for the application, and merges them.
```

#. Select :guilabel:`Flash` in the :guilabel:`Actions View` to program the resulting image to your device.

Testing
=======

> See :ref:`ug_bootloader_testing` for testing the expected runtime behavior of NSIB when built with an application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See :ref:`ug_bootloader_testing` for testing of the expected runtime behavior of the NSIB when built with an application.
```
